---
title: 'OBITools4: a unix-inspired software package for DNA metabarcoding'
date: "2024-10-01T11:14:04+02:00"
draft: true
math: true
---

## What are OBITools4?

The development of OBITools started at LECA ([Laboratory for Alpine Ecology](https://leca.osug.fr/) - [University of Grenoble](https://univ-grenoble-alpes.fr/)) in the early 2000s, together with the development of DNA metabarcoding methods in the same lab. The idea behind the OBITools project was to provide a set of UNIX command line tools that mimic standard UNIX shell commands like `grep`, `uniq` or `wc`, but work on DNA sequence files. Unlike standard UNIX tools, where the processing unit is a line of text, with OBITools the processing unit is a sequence record. In addition, some commands implementing algorithms specific to the processing of DNA metabarcoding data have been added, making OBITools, one of the widely used sequence processing tools available on UNIX-like systems, suitable for the analysis of DNA metabarcoding data.

OBITools were originally developed in Python version 2, with some computationally intensive code written in C. They were suitable for the DNA metabarcoding data volumes generated by 454 pyrosequencing in the early 2000s. With the advent of Solexa and then Illumina sequencers, the data size increased significantly, making the use of OBITools less and less efficient. Coupled with the move to Python version 3, OBITools became very difficult to use.


{{< option-sets/output >}}

- {{< cmd-option name="fasta" short="f" >}}Essais **comment** allez-vous ? 
 $$
    \frac{\pi}{4} = 1 + \sqrt{2}
$$ 

  ```bash
  $ cat myfile.fasta
  ```
  {{</cmd-option>}}
- {{< cmd-options/fasta-output >}}



 